Mathematics has since been greatly extended, and there has been a fruitful interaction between mathematics and science, to the benefit of both. Mathematical discoveries continue to be made today. According to Mikhail B. Sevryuk, in the January 2006 issue of the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, "The number of papers and books included in the Mathematical Reviews database since 1940 (the first year of operation of MR) is now more than 1.9 million, and more than 75 thousand items are added to the database each year. The overwhelming majority of works in this ocean contain new mathematical theorems and their proofs."[22]
Etymology

The word mathematics comes from the Greek ?????? (mathema), which, in the ancient Greek language, means "that which is learnt",[23] "what one gets to know", hence also "study" and "science", and in modern Greek just "lesson". The word mathema is derived from ??????? (manthano), while the modern Greek equivalent is ??????? (mathaino), both of which mean "to learn". In Greece, the word for "mathematics" came to have the narrower and more technical meaning "mathematical study" even in Classical times.[24] Its adjective is ??????????? (mathematikos), meaning "related to learning" or "studious", which likewise further came to mean "mathematical". In particular, ?????????? ????? (mathematik? tekhne), Latin: ars mathematica, meant "the mathematical art".

Similarly, one of the two main schools of thought in Pythagoreanism was known as the mathematikoi (???????????) – which at the time meant "teachers" rather than "mathematicians" in the modern sense.

In Latin, and in English until around 1700, the term mathematics more commonly meant "astrology" (or sometimes "astronomy") rather than "mathematics"; the meaning gradually changed to its present one from about 1500 to 1800. This has resulted in several mistranslations: a particularly notorious one is Saint Augustine's warning that Christians should beware of mathematici meaning astrologers, which is sometimes mistranslated as a condemnation of mathematicians.[25]

The apparent plural form in English, like the French plural form les mathematiques (and the less commonly used singular derivative la mathematique), goes back to the Latin neuter plural mathematica (Cicero), based on the Greek plural ?? ?????????? (ta mathematika), used by Aristotle (384–322 BC), and meaning roughly "all things mathematical"; although it is plausible that English borrowed only the adjective mathematic(al) and formed the noun mathematics anew, after the pattern of physics and metaphysics, which were inherited from the Greek.[26] In English, the noun mathematics takes singular verb forms. It is often shortened to maths or, in English-speaking North America, math.[27]